# Introduction

On New Year’s Eve 2018, the White Earth Nation of [Ojibwe](https://pluralism.org/anishinaabe-ojibwe-ways) formally recognized the legal rights of manoomin, also known as [wild rice](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wild_rice) (_Zizania palustris_). This declaration in tribal law included manoomin’s right to exist, flourish, regenerate, and evolve. The recognition of wild rice legal rights in tribal court is one of many cases in a global movement aimed at recognizing the legal rights of species and ecosystems. It is believed to be the first case in the United States brought before a tribal court on behalf of the [rights of nature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rights_of_nature) and attempts to establish legal rights for species and ecosystems. The case reflects an assertion of the close relationship between plant, people, and landscape predicated on an understanding of kinship and mutual reliance according to Indigenous worldview. 

Wild rice, or _Zizania palustris_, is an aquatic grass species native to the Great Lakes region of North America. Evidence of human use dates to the Late Archaic and [Early Woodlands periods](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woodland_period), around two thousand years ago. The Ojibwe are one of three tribes constituting the [Anishinaabe](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anishinaabe), or “original people,” an Indigenous nation in the Great Lakes region of North America. For the Ojibwe, wild rice is not only a foodstuff and a medicinal plant whose use dates back thousands of years; it is also considered a sacred or spiritual being with cultural and spiritual significance. Dependent on highly specific landscape conditions for growth, the history of wild rice draws upon draws upon botanical and [Traditional Ecological Knowledge](https://blog.ucs.org/science-blogger/the-importance-of-traditional-ecological-knowledge-tek-when-examining-climate-change/) (TEK) and reflects a close interweaving between people, place, and plant. 

Since the 1950s, attempts at cultivating wild rice spread from Minnesota to California. Wild rice has transformed from a gourmet delicacy to a superfood staple in the advent of commercialized production and institutionalized breeding programs. Indeed, the grain boasts many health benefits, including being low in fat and high in dietary fiber, minerals, protein, and vitamins. Demand for the highly nutritious monoecious crop has prompted tensions between Indigenous growers and large-scale commercialization and commodification of the plant. A food source for humans for thousands of years, the significance of wild rice has only recently become more widely studied and understood by a broader audience, including the scientific community and general public. Issues surrounding food sovereignty, climate change-induced habitat loss, and other environmental threats, have paved the way for groundbreaking legal developments, providing environmental protections based on the recognition of wild rice as a non-human person according to Indigenous worldviews. 

# Botanical Nomenclature

Northern Wild Rice, or _Zizania palustris_, is one of four wild rice species native to North America. The _Zizania_ genus is housed in the Oryzeae tribe of the Poaceae (grass) family and is comprised of four species, including _Z. palustris_, _Z. aquatica_, _Z. texana_, and _Z. latifolia_. _Z. palustris_ is unrelated to the Oryza white rice domesticated in Africa and Asia. In fact, _Z. Palustris_ remains [undomesticated](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domestication) to this day. The two species diverged twenty-six to thirty million years ago, with _Zizania_ becoming established in North America about five million years ago and expanding across the continent using ice-age [refugia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glacial_refugium). Wild rice stalks are known as manoomin, or “good berry,” in Anishinaabe language and as Psíŋ in Dakota. 

_Zizania palustris_, whose specific epithet translate as “marshy” or “swampy” and refers to the habitat type in which the plant grows, was published by [Carl Linnaeus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Linnaeus) in his _Species Plantarum_ (1753) and _Mantissa Plantarum Altera_ (1771). Prior to that, _Z. Palustris_ was thought to belong to _Z. Aquatica_, a species of wild rice native to the Eastern United States. With distinct but overlapping ranges and differences in size and shape, Linnaeus established the two as separate species. However, many refer to _Z. palustris_ as _Z. aquatica_ today. 

The turn of the twenty-first century saw the release of the first wild rice genome map, and with it, concerns over the flow of genes from cultivated to wild rice stands, or groups of plants. In the wild rice waters of northern Minnesota, researchers have found that wild rice populations are genetically distinct from one another, and that there is in fact very little [gene flow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gene_flow) across watersheds. Concerns remain that genetically diverse wild stands, whose seeds are unable to be stored in [ex situ repositories](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seed_bank), will be overtaken by genetically modified wild rice supergroups.

# Wild Rice in Indigenous Prophecy

In North America, the intertwined story of people and plant begins around 950 C.E. The Anishinaabe nation received a prophecy from the prophets of the [Seven Fires](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seven_fires_prophecy) and a floating seashell, called the sacred [miigis](http://nativeamericannetroots.net/diary/1392). The prophecy instructed them to travel westwards to where the “food grows on water,” referring to wild rice. The Anishinaabe migration occurred over the course of approximately five hundred years and included several legs to the journey. The Ojibwe people of the Anishinaabe nation eventually settled in Gichigami, the area east of Lake Superior, in present-day Minnesota. The movement of the Ojibwe pushed the [Dakota](https://www.mnhs.org/fortsnelling/learn/native-americans/dakota-people), the previous inhabitants of the region, to relocate to the south and west.

A special gift from the Creator that tied Anishinaabe people to lands, manoomin, as a part of Anishinaabe [materia medica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Materia_medica), serves both ritual and medicinal purposes. Considered the most sacred _mashkiki_, or medicine, manoomin contains not only a material presence, but also spiritual one, providing both nourishment and healing. Used to promote recovery from sickness through ingestion or through topical poultices, manoomin harvest became a ritualized practice. The gathering of manoomin, and other mashkiki, from the Gichimanidoogitigan, or “Creator’s Garden,” was timed in accordance with the autumnal wild rice harvest and was often overseen by a rice chief. Many of the key ceremonies in the Anishinaable ceremonial complex were timed in accordance with the harvest. The continued use of manoomin by the Ojibwe helps fulfill the prophecy that originally brought the Anishinaabe to the Great Lakes region. 

# Traders, Treaties, and Usufructuary Rights

Europeans first arrived in the Great Lakes region in the early seventeenth century, beginning with the French explorers and missionaries in the 1620s. The Ojibwe acted as guides, interpreters, and trading partners with the French, often using the Ojibwe language as the lingua franca in trading. Jacques Marquette, a French Jesuit missionary who was the first European to map the northern part of the Mississippi River Valley, described the “wild oat” as a “sort of grass,” which resembled the wild oats growing amidst wheat in France. The French were struck by the plant’s likeness, in their eyes, to the leguminous tare grass, and referred to wild rice as _folle avoine_, translated as “wild oats” or “fool oats.” Many compared the aquatic growing conditions of wild rice along lake and stream margins to the flooded rice [paddies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paddy_field) used for rice cultivation in Asia. 

By the 1770s, a large-scale [fur trade](https://www.mnhs.org/fortsnelling/learn/fur-trade) had begun in the Great Lakes region, which lasted until the 1830s. Members of the Ojibwe acted as trading partners, guides, and interpreters for the French. Prior to the Ojibwe trade of wild rice with Europeans, other Indigenous nations, including the Sioux, Algonquin, and Menominee, had harvested wild rice. The [Menominee](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Menominee) tribe specifically were referred to as _manoominiig_, or the “wild rice people” by both Ojibwe and French. As scholar Thomas Vennum wrote, “Each of these groups had a diversified economy and therefore depended upon wild rice for food and trade to differing degrees.” In other cases, wild rice provided a means to keep the Anishinaabeg out of trade dependencies with entities such as the Hudson’s Bay Company by providing a surplus trade good.

Several land treaties between the Ojibwe and the United States were signed in the mid-nineteenth century, including the Treaty of 1836, Treaty of 1837, and the Treaty of 1842. The [Dawes Act of 1887](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dawes_Act) forcibly removed Ojibwe from their land to boarding schools, camps, and mills. It also implemented the process of allotment, which led to the creation of reservations. Much of the Traditional Ecological Knowledge created and maintained over centuries was also lost as a result of this separation and reallocation. The land treaties gave the Ojibwe usufructuary rights, or the “right to use legal property,” which included the right to hunt, fish, and gather on ceded territory. The changing relationship between Ojibwe and the landscape altered wild rice gathering practices. 

However, mere decades after the treaties were signed, the United States Army Corps of Engineers built a series of dams, intended to control and maintain a predictable water flow for downstream mills, in the upper Mississippi watershed. The loss of wild rice habitat due to the flooding resulting from dam construction was compounded by the region’s timber logging industry. The Ojibwe connection to the landscape and loss of knowledge, and subsequent breakdown of kinship systems, was irreparably altered through the process of land cession and forced removal in the mid-nineteenth century. 

# Cultivation for Consumption

Both Americans and Europeans had ambitions to cultivate wild rice outside of its native habitat. Pehr Kalm, a disciple of the Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus, undertook a collections tour of North America between 1747-1751. Under the instruction of Linnaeus—as part of a project to build a larger mercantile empire within Europe, and commissioned by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences—Kalm’s task was to collect a “kind of Rice… used by one Nation… as food instead of grains, which grows without cultivation there in all marshes and lakes.” Kalm brought over one hundred plant species, including _Zizania aquatica_, or eastern wild rice, with the intention of domesticating the plant species in Sweden and trading it as a crop used for livestock feed and human consumption within Europe. 

Many travelers to the Great Lakes region in the century following Kalm’s expedition viewed wild rice as productive crop well-suited for potential cultivation in the analogous climates of Northern Europe. Jonathan Carver, a colonel and explorer from Massachusetts, entertained the idea of producing wild rice as a domesticated crop in the “infant colonies” of the United States after traveling to the the western Great Lakes region in the late 1760s. 

Carver and Kalm were not alone in entertaining the idea of cultivating wild rice. In his 1803 “Observation on the _Zizania aquatica_,” botanist Aylmer Bourke Lambert described the transportation of _Z. Aquatica seeds_, from Canada to Europe, in glass jars. Long considered a “desideratum among the botanists of [England],” he noted his desire to grow the seeds in the “many shallow pieces of water” in Great Britain and Ireland. Beginning with French botanist André Michaux, few, if any, were able to grow wild rice in Europe.

However, the highly specific habitat conditions required for wild rice growth meant that early cultivation attempts failed. In an 1852 United States geological survey, American geologist David Dale Owen wrote: “This grain has been frequently introduced to the attention of cultivators, and is worth of notice, not only for the value of its products, but the peculiar nature of the soil to which it is adapted, being necessarily unfit for any of our ordinary cultivated grains.” He later specified, “It is in these situations best exposed to the proper degree of inundation, and finds a suitable bed of the slimy sand, in which [wild rice] grows most readily. It is rarely met with on inland lakes which have no outlet.” Owen described the specific features of wild rice habitat, including the regular inundation, steady water flow, and relative water depth required for wild rice growth in aquatic habitats, many of which were lost only a few decades later due to flooding caused by newly constructed dams.

# Harvest Histories

In “Gathering Wild Rice, 1849-1855,” artist Seth Eastman depicts three women, most likely Anishinaabe, who are in the process of harvesting wild rice. This watercolor drawing, the first known painting of wild rice, depicts one woman paddling a canoe and two others beating rice stalks with flat paddles. American anthropologist and ethnographer Frances Densmore later captured the multi-step harvesting process in her photography from the early twentieth century. In her 1928 “How Indians Use Wild Plants for Food, Medicine, and Crafts,” Densmore describes the process of establishing harvesting camps and the act of “ricing” itself, in which Ojibwe women would harvest using birchbark canoes. When ricing, one person would paddle the canoe using a push pole (Gaandakii-iganaak), which another would knock rice stalks with special sticks (Bawa’iganaak) so that ripe rice seeds would fall into the canoe and into the lake water. After harvesting, the rice was dried on birchbark sheets, parched to loosen the husk, and pounded with wooden pastels. It would then be winnowed and trodden upon, and later stored.

Cultural traditions involving wild rice were closely linked to the seasons. Many key traditional Anishinaabe ceremonies and rituals were timed in accordance with the thanksgiving for manoomin harvest. Anishinaabe harvesters would set up harvest camps, or Manoominikewin, for “ricing.” In 1820, Henry Schoolcraft, on an expedition to find the source of the Mississippi River, noted the role of wild rice as a foodstuff closely linked to seasonal change: “The necessity of changing their camps often, to procure game or fish, the want of domesticated animals, the general dependence on wild rice, and the custom of journeying in canoes, has produced a general uniformity of life.” The harvest was a multi-step process involving both men and women, who would perform different tasks.

Historically, both Ojibwe men and women performed wild rice harvesting, with men steering the canoe and women knocking the grains into the canoe. In the decades following land cessions, forced migration, and non-Indigenous settlement, the labor relations and gender roles involved in harvesting changed. During the early twentieth century, the state of Minnesota created [wild rice camps](https://www.kaxe.org/local-news/2023-09-22/wild-rice-camp-highlights-sacred-plant-and-the-fight-to-protect-it), and state control over wild rice harvesting was codified in 1939. Here, women’s labor was not recognized by settlers and wild rice harvesting became primarily a men’s role. Today, both men and women participate in the harvest, although men remain the primary harvesters. 

# Landscape as Collaborator

Wild rice plays an important part in the aquatic plant communities of the northern Great Lakes region. Benefitting local food networks and wetland ecology by participating in the water [nutrient cycle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nutrient_cycle), stabilizing coastal river wetland sediment, and providing habitat for other species, wild rice requires specific landscape conditions to grow. Rooted in sediment, the plant grows along the margins of small streams and shallow lakes. Albert Jenks, a University of Minnesota professor of anthropology, noted the specific landscape conditions required for its growth in his Wild Rice Gatherers of the Upper Lakes (1907): “Wherever the last glacier left little mid-bottomed, water-filled hollows, there wild rice has established itself, if other conditions are favorable. Such ponds and lakes are characteristic of the alluvial apron spread out over Wisconsin and Minnesota.”

Like other grasses, a crucial phase of the wild rice’s life cycle is the shattering of the mature seed, which is when the seed drops off the plant once it ripens. Seed heads are located at the top of the plant and ripe seeds drop from the plant into the water, sinking to the soil where they remain dormant over the winter. They usually [germinate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germination) in the following spring. By early summer, wild rice forms floating mats of leaves and seeds cross-pollinated by wind. After reaching maturity in late summer and harvested in late summer or early autumn, the grass dies. Seed shattering occurs over days to weeks, which allows for multiple harvests to take place. 

Harvesting was not only a process of gathering but also a process of reseeding the plant for future harvests. Jenks wrote that “the plant, unless it is artificially sown, is gradually being extinguished in such beds as are continuously used.” The significant portion of seeds being knocked back into water rather than harvested in the canoe was not waste, but an active management strategy. Responsive to changing environmental conditions, the reseeding during harvest treats the landscape as a collaborator: wild rice seeds require submergence in the soil during undisturbed dormancy in order to remain viable. The aquatic landscape remains an active participant in the reseeding process, which highlights the importance of the landscape in maintaining a relationship between wild rice and humans. The artificial sowing of wild rice seeds is an activation of Traditional Ecological Knowledge.

# Cultivation, Commodification, and Commercialization

Cultivation was spearheaded in the 1950s by university scientist Ervin Oelke, who had collected germ plasms from twenty-four natural stands, or a community of organisms growing in a specific location, that fell within the 1837 treaty area. An official wild rice breeding program was established at the University of Minnesota in the 1960s. The aim of the program was to cultivate wild rice with disease and pest resistance and to produce non-seed shattering varieties. This would facilitate mechanical harvest and increase yield size. The program ultimately produced four strands of cultivated “wild” rice between 1968 and 2000. By 1969, the Minnesota state legislature provided funding for _Z. palustris cultivation_ and by 2017, appropriated recurring funding for the Northern Wild Rice breeding and genetics program.

In the early 1960s, food product company Uncle Ben’s Inc.—now called Ben’s Original and owned by Mars, Inc.—began incorporating wild rice into its rice blend. Cultivated wild rice production in northern California’s Sacramento Valley began in the 1970s. In the 1980s, both Uncle Ben’s Inc. and NorCal, another California cultivator, established patents for their cultivated hybrid wild rice varieties. Between 1983 and 1986, wild rice production had surpassed Minnesota, and by 2020 California produced 95% of all cultivated wild rice. Wild rice was also commercially cultivated in Canada, where, by 2023, the crop’s revenue surpassed $5 million CAN. 

Cultivation is domestication occurring in real time. Today, cultivated wild rice is grown in California, Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin, and is exported worldwide. Wild rice has been introduced to Turkey, and the United Kingdom is the largest export market for United States-grown cultivated wild rice. Indigenous growers mainly sell directly to domestic consumers while commercially cultivated wild rice is sold to large retailers. Increased consumer access to wild rice through commercialization, often at a lower cost to consumers, has also transformed the plant’s identity from a gourmet delicacy to a health food staple as more people are able to access and incorporate wild rice into their diet.

# Recognizing the Rights of Nature

Climate change poses a threat to wild rice. With rising temperatures and less ice cover, wild rice seeds, which require frozen temperatures during their dormancy, are not able to germinate as well or at all. In addition, rapid fluctuations in water depth due to severe weather events disrupt plant growth. The amount of suitable habitat shrinks. Climate change has increased both concentrated rainfall events and droughts.

Serious threats are posed to naturally occurring wild rice stands by the potential expansion of copper and nickel open-pit mining, and their toxic discharges. The amount of sulfate in the St. Louis watershed has increased over the past half century. Today, pipelines like the Enbridge “Line 3” and others threaten the health not only of wild rice habitats, but also of the entire St. Louis watershed and the ecosystems contained therein. 

On August 4, 2021, the White Earth Band of Ojibwe and manoomin filed a lawsuit against the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (DNR). _Manoomin v. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources_ was the first [rights of nature](https://www.centerforenvironmentalrights.org/rights-of-manoomin) case to be brought before a tribal court. The action argued that the DNR had violated treaty rights by putting manoomin at risk by issuing an amended permit to the Enbridge corporation, who had temporarily pumped five billion gallons of water out of wild rice habitat. It asked for the DNR to nullify the pipeline water permits.

Because manoomin is a non-human person according to Ojibwe worldview, with its own rights, it was able to serve as the plaintiff in the court case. The expansion of legal protections and human rights-type legal protections to non-human species and ecosystems incorporates elements of Traditional Ecological Knowledge worldviews by highlighting the connections between human and non-human persons. Potawatomi scientist [Robin Wall Kimmerer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robin_Wall_Kimmerer) characterizes this relationship as one of reciprocity, “rules of sorts that govern our taking, shape our relationships with the natural world, and rein in our tendency to consume... Reciprocity helps resolve the moral tension of taking a life by giving in return something of value that sustains the ones who sustain us.” The link between people, plant, and landscape evidenced in the relationship between the Ojibwe and wild rice serves as a framework for expanding notions of care and conservation. Recognizing the [rights of nature](https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2021/04/22/rights-of-nature-lawsuits/) finds its grounding in Indigenous worldviews and the activation of Traditional Ecological Knowledge.

While the the case was not pursued further, and the state did not recognize the tribal jurisdiction over state matters like the issuing of water permits, _Manoomin v. Minnesota Department of Natural Resources_ sets an example of how the legal rights of nature may be invoked in order to protect both individual species and entire ecosystems. It provides one example of how human and plant relationships based upon this expanded worldview may be used as leverage within larger conservation efforts, and also points out larger power dynamics that still consider plants, and non-human species, as property. 

From early botanical attempts at domestication in Europe and its role in newly created trade economies, to the more recent commercialization and breeding programs, wild rice serves as a key example of the role of plants as non-human persons in Indigenous worldviews and the interconnectedness and entanglement between plant, people, and landscape. The unique growing conditions and reciprocal dependencies between the Ojibwe and wild rice acknowledge the plant’s role within larger environmental, social, and moral contexts, evidenced in early travel accounts, visual representations, and ethnographical works. More recent legal recourse both complicates and denies this worldview and asks us to consider more broadly the agency of plants the impact of human and plant relationships on our ecosystems and landscapes today.






